<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Why could he not have said Miss Butterworth? These Van Burnams are proud, most vilely proud as the poet has it. <cite>—⁠<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">A. B.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<em>As was asserted by her husband in his sworn examination.</em>
						<a href="chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was <em>so</em> probable, it cannot be considered an untruth. <cite>—⁠<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">A. B.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>My attention has been called to the fact that I have not confessed whether it was owing to a mistake made by Mr. Gryce or myself, that Franklin Van Burnam was identified as the man who had entered the adjoining house on the night of the murder. Well, the truth is, neither of us was to blame for that. The man I identified (it was while watching the guests who attended Mrs. Van Burnam’s funeral, you remember) was really Mr. Stone; but owing to the fact that this latter gentleman had lingered in the vestibule till he was joined by Franklin and that they had finally entered together, some confusion was created in the mind of the man on duty in the hall, so that when Mr. Gryce asked him who it was that came in immediately after the four who arrived together, he answered Mr. Franklin Van Burnam; being anxious to win his superior’s applause and considering that person much more likely to merit the detective’s attention than a mere friend of the family like Mr. Stone. In punishment for this momentary display of egotism, he has been discharged from the force, I believe. <cite>—⁠<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">A. B.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-42.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
